Initial conversion of the specification to bikeshed flavoured Markdown (#143)
theupdateframework/specification: tuf-spec.md

<pre class='metadata'>
Title: The Update Framework Specification
Shortname: TUF

> Status: LS-COMMIT

Author: Thanks for catching this, I had intended to raise this question myself. We could, probably should, use a different status when building the release versions of the specification.

Perhaps TS: "Technical Specification" for releases and DTS: "Draft Technical Specification" for non-releases?

> Status: LS-COMMIT

Author: TS & DTS are only for documents that claim to be ISO process related documentation. Instead I'm defining a custom header that removes display of the Status text and lists the version right up at the top instead.

Abstract: A framework for securing software update systems.
Date: 2020-12-11
Editor: Justin Cappos, NYU
Editor: Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy, Datadog
Editor: Joshua Lock, VMware
Editor: Marina Moore, NYU
Editor: Lukas Pühringer, NYU
Repository: theupdateframework/specification
Mailing List: https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/theupdateframework
Indent: 2
Boilerplate: copyright no, conformance no
Markup Shorthands: css no, markdown yes
</pre>

> Version: **1.0.17**

Author: Oh, I already have changes for release_checker on a branch. I will find them and push to this PR

> Version: **1.0.17**

Author: Pushed in 3aa6863

repo](https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/issues).

> # Introduction # {#introduction}

Author: Unfortunately that isn't supported by Bikeshed, which only [supports](https://tabatkins.github.io/bikeshed/#markdown) underlined and #-surrounded headings. I'd be happy to add a patch to switch to underlined headings, if you think that would be more readable?

> # Introduction # {#introduction}

Reviewer: I think underlined headings only support two levels... at any rate, let's not overdo the bikeshedding. :)

attribute-value fields for backwards-compatible format changes.  If
a backwards incompatible format change is needed, a new filename can
be used.

## Metaformat ## {#metaformat}

Implementers of TUF may use any data format for metadata files as long as
all fields in this specification are included and TUF clients are able to
interpret them without ambiguity. Implementers should choose a data format
that allows for canonicalization, or one that will decode data
deterministically by default so that signatures can be accurately verified.
The chosen data format should be documented in the POUF of the implementation.
The examples in this document use a subset of the JSON object format, with
floating-point numbers omitted.  When calculating the digest of an
object, we use the "canonical JSON" subdialect as described at
    http://wiki.laptop.org/go/Canonical_JSON

## File formats: general principles ## {#file-formats-general-principles}

All signed metadata objects have the format:

<pre highlight="json">
{
  "signed" : <a for="role">ROLE</a>,
  "signatures" : [
    { "keyid" : <a for="role">KEYID</a>,
      "sig" : <a>SIGNATURE</a> }
      , ... ]
}
</pre>

> where:

Author: Agreed, will remove in a follow-on commit.

      : <dfn for="role">ROLE</dfn>
      ::

>         a dictionary whose "_type" field describes the role type.

Author: Nicely spotted!

    "public" : <a for="keyval-ecdsa">PUBLIC</a>
  }
}
</pre>

where:

  : <dfn for="keyval-ecdsa">PUBLIC</dfn>
  ::
    PEM format and a string.

The <a for="role">KEYID</a> of a key is the hexdigest of the SHA-256 hash of
the canonical form of the key.

Metadata <dfn>date-time</dfn> follows the ISO 8601 standard.  The expected
format of the combined date and time string is "YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SSZ".  Time is
always in UTC, and the "Z" time zone designator is attached to indicate a
zero UTC offset.  An example date-time string is "1985-10-21T01:21:00Z".

## File formats: root.json ## {#file-formats-root}

The <dfn>root.json</dfn> file is signed by the root role's keys.  It indicates
which keys are authorized for all top-level roles, including the root
role itself.  Revocation and replacement of top-level role keys, including
for the root role, is done by changing the keys listed for the roles in
this file.

The "signed" portion of <a>root.json</a> is as follows:

<pre highlight="json">
{
  "_type" : "root",
  "spec_version" : <a>SPEC_VERSION</a>,
  "consistent_snapshot": <a>CONSISTENT_SNAPSHOT</a>,
  "version" : <a for="role">VERSION</a>,
  "expires" : <a>EXPIRES</a>,
  "keys" : {

>     <a for="root">KEYID</a> : KEY,

Author: Good suggestion, I will add this.

  : <dfn>EXPIRES</dfn>
  ::
    A <a>date-time</a> string indicating when metadata should be considered
    expired and no longer trusted by clients.  Clients MUST NOT trust an
    expired file.

  : <dfn for="root">ROLE</dfn>
  ::
    One of "root", "snapshot", "targets", "timestamp", or "mirrors".
    A role for each of "root", "snapshot", "timestamp", and "targets" MUST be
    specified in the key list. The role of "mirror" is OPTIONAL.  If not
    specified, the mirror list will not need to be signed if mirror lists are
    being used.

  : <dfn for="root">KEYID</dfn>
  ::
    A <a for="role">KEYID</a>, which MUST be correct for the specified KEY.
    Clients MUST calculate each <a for="role">KEYID</a> to verify this is
    correct for the associated key.  Clients MUST ensure that for any
    <a for="role">KEYID</a> represented in this key list and in other files,
    only one unique key has that <a for="role">KEYID</a>.

  : <dfn>THRESHOLD</dfn>
  ::
    An integer number of keys of that role whose signatures are required in
    order to consider a file as being properly signed by that role.

<div class='example' id='example-root.json'>

> A <a>root.json</a> example file:

Author: Good eye, I'll review the examples.

  : <dfn for="targets-obj">HASHES</dfn>
  ::
    A dictionary that specifies one or more hashes of the target file at
    <a>TARGETPATH</a>, with a string describing the cryptographic hash function
    as key and <a>HASH</a> as defined for <a>METAFILES</a>.  For example:
    `{ "sha256": HASH, ... }`.

  : <dfn>CUSTOM</a>
  ::
    An object.  If defined, the elements and values of the <a>CUSTOM</a> object
    will be made available to the client application.  The format of the
    <a>CUSTOM</a> object is opaque to the framework, which only needs to know
    that the "custom" attribute maps to an object.  The <a>CUSTOM</a> object
    may include version numbers, dependencies, requirements, or any other data
    that the application wants to include to describe the file at
    <a>TARGETPATH</a>.  The application may use this information to guide
    download decisions.

<dfn>DELEGATIONS</dfn> is an object whose format is the following:

<pre highlight="json">
{
  "keys" : {
      KEYID : KEY,
      ...
  },
  "roles" : [
    {
      "name": <a>ROLENAME</a>,
      "keyids" : [ KEYID, ... ] ,
      "threshold" : <a>THRESHOLD</a>,

>       ("path_hash_prefixes" : [ HEX_DIGEST, ... ] |

Author: I had that at one point, but wasn't sure it made sense. I will re-add as you have also suggested it. We can improve the layout (it's a bit jarring jumping to the middle of a paragraph to find a definition) in future.

      "paths" : [ PATHPATTERN, ... ]),
      "terminating": <a>TERMINATING</a>,
    },
    ...
  ]
}
</pre>

where:

  : "keys"
  ::

>     A list of <a for="role">KEYID</a>'s identifying the public keys to verify

Author: grammatically you can argue this one either way, but your suggestion seems to be the more common approach.

    statements that match the delegation's pattern, which stops the delegation
    processing once this delegation (and its descendants) have been processed.
    A terminating delegation for a package causes any further statements about a
    package that are not made by the delegated party or its descendants to be
    ignored.

In order to discuss target paths, a role MUST specify only one of the
<a>"path_hash_prefixes"</a> or <a>"paths"</a> attributes, each of which we
discuss next.

  : <dfn>"path_hash_prefixes"</dfn>
  ::
    A list of HEX_DIGESTs used to succinctly describe a set of target
    paths. Specifically, each HEX_DIGEST in <a>"path_hash_prefixes"</a>
    describes a set of target paths; therefore, <a>"path_hash_prefixes"</a> is
    the union over each prefix of its set of target paths.  The target paths
    must meet this condition: each target path, when hashed with the SHA-256
    hash function to produce a 64-byte hexadecimal digest
    (HEX_DIGEST), must share the same prefix as one of the prefixes
    in <a>"path_hash_prefixes"</a>.  This is useful to split a large number of
    targets into separate bins identified by consistent hashing.

>   : <dfn>"paths"</dfn>

Author: Agreed, I an intending to spend some time working on the DELEGATION object definition in future.

# Detailed client workflow # {#detailed-client-workflow}

Note: If a step in the following workflow does not succeed (e.g., the update
is aborted because a new metadata file was not signed), the client should
still be able to update again in the future. Errors raised during the update
process should not leave clients in an unrecoverable state.

## Record fixed update start time ## {#fix-time}

Record the time at which the update began as the fixed update start time.
Time is fixed at the beginning of the update workflow to allow
an application using TUF to effectively pause time, in order to ensure that
metadata which has a valid expiration time at the beginning of an update
does not fail an expiration check later in the update workflow.

## Load trusted root metadata ## {#load-trusted-root}

Load the trusted root metadata file.  We assume that a good,
trusted copy of this file was shipped with the package manager or software
updater using an out-of-band process.  Note that the expiration of the
trusted root metadata file does not matter, because we will attempt to update
it in the next step.

## Update the root role ## {#update-root}

> 1. Since it may now be signed using entirely different keys, the client MUST

Reviewer: I was thinking of the discussion in https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/pull/133.

> 1. Since it may now be signed using entirely different keys, the client MUST

Author: I had originally used auto-numbering but switched to manually numbering steps in the client workflow in https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/pull/143/commits/878f3cb4adec50855a7a6066e3ac9b6585fecd3a. I would like us to switch to auto-numbering, but for that to work we need to be able to cross-reference other steps without having to know what their step number is.

> 1. Since it may now be signed using entirely different keys, the client MUST

Author: This is definitely something to capture as future work, if/when this PR lands.

> 1. Since it may now be signed using entirely different keys, the client MUST

Author: Filed as https://github.com/theupdateframework/specification/issues/146

  version N+1 is not signed as required, discard it, abort the update cycle,
  and report the signature failure.  On the next update cycle, begin at step
  [[#update-root]] and version N of the root metadata file.

5. **Check for a rollback attack.** The version number of the trusted
  root metadata file (version N) MUST be less than or equal to the version
  number of the new root metadata file (version N+1). Effectively, this means
  checking that the version number signed in the new root metadata file is
  indeed N+1.  If the version of the new root metadata file is less than the
  trusted metadata file, discard it, abort the update cycle, and report the
  rollback attack.  On the next update cycle, begin at step [[#update-root]]
  and version N of the root metadata file.

6. Note that the expiration of the new (intermediate) root metadata
  file does not matter yet, because we will check for it in step 5.3.10.

7. **Set the trusted root metadata file** to the new root metadata
  file.

8. **Persist root metadata.** The client MUST write the file to
  non-volatile storage as FILENAME.EXT (e.g. root.json).

> 9. Repeat steps 5.3.1 to 5.3.8

Reviewer: There has also been a shift on the third level...
```suggestion
9. Repeat steps 5.3.2 to 5.3.9
```

10. **Check for a freeze attack.** The expiration timestamp in the
  trusted root metadata file MUST be higher than the fixed update start time.
  If the trusted root metadata file has expired, abort the update cycle,
  report the potential freeze attack.  On the next update cycle, begin at step

>   5.1 and version N of the root metadata file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 [[#update-root]] and version N of the root metadata file.
```

  number of the new targets metadata file MUST match the version number listed
  in the trusted snapshot metadata.  If the versions do not match, discard it,
  abort the update cycle, and report the failure.

5. **Check for a freeze attack**. The expiration timestamp in the
  new targets metadata file MUST be higher than the fixed update start time.
  If so, the new targets metadata file becomes the trusted targets metadata
  file.  If the new targets metadata file is expired, discard it, abort the
  update cycle, and report the potential freeze attack.

6. **Persist targets metadata**. The client MUST write the file to
  non-volatile storage as FILENAME.EXT (e.g. targets.json).

7. **Perform a pre-order depth-first search for metadata about the
  desired target, beginning with the top-level targets role.** Note: If
  any metadata requested in steps 5.6.7.1 - 5.6.7.2 cannot be downloaded nor
  validated, end the search and report that the target cannot be found.

  1. If this role has been visited before, then skip this role
     (so that cycles in the delegation graph are avoided).  Otherwise, if an
     application-specific maximum number of roles have been visited, then go to

>      step 5.6 (so that attackers cannot cause the client to waste excessive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     step [[#fetch-target]] (so that attackers cannot cause the client to waste excessive
```

file with both the new and old root keys. Any time such a change is
required, the root.json file is versioned and accessible by version number,
e.g., 3.root.json.

Clients that have outdated root keys can update to the latest set of trusted
root keys, by incrementally downloading all intermediate root metadata
files, and verifying that each current version of the root metadata is
signed by a threshold of keys specified by its immediate predecessor as well
as a threshold of keys specified by itself.
For example, if there is a 1.root.json that has threshold 2 and a
2.root.json that has threshold 3, 2.root.json MUST be signed by at least 2
keys defined in 1.root.json and at least 3 keys defined in 2.root.json. The
client starts the root key update process with the latest version of root
metadata available on the client, and stops when no version N+1 (where N is
the latest trusted version) of the root metadata is available from the
repository. This ensures that an outdated client can always correctly
re-trace the chain of trust across multiple root key updates, even if the
latest set of root keys on the client dates back multiple root metadata

> versions. See step 5.2 of the client application workflow for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
versions. See step [[#update-root]]  of the client application workflow for more details.
```

Most importantly, no metadata file format must be updated to refer to the
names of metadata or target files with their version numbers included. In
other words, if a metadata file A refers to another metadata file B as
filename.ext, then the filename must remain as filename.ext and not
version_number.filename.ext. This rule is in place so that metadata signed
by roles with offline keys will not be forced to sign for the metadata file
whenever it is updated. In the next subsection, we will see how clients
will reproduce the name of the intended file.

Finally, the root metadata should write the Boolean "consistent_snapshot"
attribute at the root level of its keys of attributes. If consistent
snapshots are not written by the repository, then the attribute may either
be left unspecified or be set to the False value.  Otherwise, it must be
set to the True value.

Regardless of whether consistent snapshots are ever used or not, all
released versions of root metadata files should always be provided
so that outdated clients can update to the latest available root.

## Reading consistent snapshots ## {#reading-consistent-snapshots}

> See section 5 (The client application) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [[#detailed-client-workflow]] for more details.
```
